# 20.440: Analysis of Biological Networks, Problem Set 5

## Overview
This repository contains data and code required to generate a bar chart showing the frequency of mutations in a given chromosome (chr 11) for two patients with acute myeloid leukemia. The repo is organized into three folders: the code-and-instructions-folder containing the code to generate the figure as well as the corresponding README, the Figure folder containing the figure the code generates, and the patient-data folder containing the data needed to generated the figure. Our repo allows the user to generate a figure forthe mutational frequency of chromosome 11 for 2 patients. This is visualized as a bar chart. Our ability to read the data files and generate the figure of chromosome 11 frequency of mutations serves as a proof of concept for us to be able to read the files necessary for our aims and complete the analysis. 

## Data
All data was obtained from the National Cancer Institute (NCI) GDC data portal, also known as The Cancer Genome Atlas. There are two data files associated with each patient - clinical data and mutation data.  The raw clinical data contains information related to the patient's medical history and clinical course and is stored in files containing the patient identifier followed by the word "clinical" (ex. p2clinical.tsv). This file information such as the patient's age, gender, race, diagnosis, age at diagnosis, etc. The raw mutation data was obtained through a variety of methods, which vary according to the patient.  These methods include targeted sequencing, whole exome sequencing, RNA-seq, miRNA-seq, WGS, genotyping arrays, and methylation arrays. Users of the GDC data portal can query by clinical information such as cancer type, patient age, sex, etc. Upon query, a list of patient IDs along with corresponding raw data is returned. Among the raw data is a list of mutations, named by chromosome, position, and mutation type mutation (substitution, deletion, etc.), the consequence (missense, frameshift, etc.), implicated gene, amino acid change, and VEP, SIFT, and PolyPhen impacts, if available.. We have used this information for our anlaysis by downloading a TSV containing the mutation information and storing the files under a file name that contains the patient identifier followed by the term "frequent-mutations" (ex. p2frequent-mutations). 

The data can be acccessed at 
GDC portal: https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/
To examine data, navigate to the exploration tab. The menu on the left allows you to filter the data and generate queries.

## Folder Structure
The folder 'patient-data' contains the clinical data file and mutation summary data file for each patient (p2 and p3) in the tsv format. The files are labeled by the patient ID as well as whether they are the clinical or mutation file. The folder 'code-and-instructions' contains the README.md and a code file (.py, for implementation in the IDE Spyder). The provided script reads the data in the patient-data folder, uses the mutation data to calculate the frequency of mutations in each chromosome, and creates a data frame of information with one row per patient. The frequency of mutations is calculated by determining the percent of a patient's documented mutations that occur on a given chromosome by counting the number of mutaitons for a chromosome and dividing by the total number of patient mutations. THe data frame generated in the script contains the clinical and mutation data from the files in addition to the calculated frequency data. The script then plots a figure showing the frequency of mutations in chromosome 11 for each patient by accessing the data frame. The folder 'Figure' contains a .png file that shows the output of the script for reference.

## Installation
The script (hw5codegit.py) was written in Python 3.6.5. It uses the software packages os, pandas, and seaborn. os is a standard library and does not need to be installed. Seaborn is a library that is part of matplotlib. Because pandas and matplotlib are both part of SciPy, it is recommended to install Anaconda for automatic access to all SciPy software packages. This code was written with SciPy version 1.1.0. The script contains all steps necessary to import the required software packages, execute the code, and produce the figure. The code can be run in an IDE of choice, ex. Spyder. The script can be modified to save the figure to a desired location.
